on today's episode of hell theory with
the incredible guys at mind pump we
cover their individual backgrounds in
Fitness why they started mind pump in
the first place how they skyrocketed the
podcast stardom why cardio is terrible
for weight loss and the unsexy truth
behind the biggest health problems
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guests are Sal Adam and Justin
the triumvirate behind the behemoths
health and fitness podcast and mind pump
they've been putting out a podcast every
weekday for the last three years and are
rapidly approaching episode 800 which is
madness they are perpetually in the top
ten on iTunes and have had several times
ranked number one in the health category
their unique blend of raw truth
entertaining style and relatability are
what make them so damn great and that's
why I am excited to have them on today
but what I want to know guys is that
thing that makes you so interesting that
blend of like the entertainment and the
raw truth how did that get started why
did that become the foundation of who
you are being ourselves I guess yeah we
you know it's funny the fitness industry
now has been a monster for a few decades
and it's interesting when you have
people coming in and just being as real
and authentic as possible and that being
you know striking a chord it's it tells
you a lot about the fitness industry we
all grew up in the fitness industry
we've been doing this for a long time
and when we first met we all sat down
and one of the number one things that we
all connected over was to be as
authentic as possible and to say what
was on our mind and hopefully it would
resonate and it seems like it has well
is that important to you guys that well
I think I think it's important to that
all right none of us have talent when it
comes to being on a camera figure so we
really don't I mean we we got into this
I mean we were all fitness professionals
and that was what we were great that's
our expertise it was not acting or
getting on a camera or getting on video
or audio and recording a podcast but
what I think is so important is the
authenticity of the message and then
being true to ourselves and I feel like
we're in a space right now where a lot
of people copy each other and a lot of
people are putting out a bunch of
[__] just so they can sell at market
something in fact like the
in our space the way you make a lot of
money is you you build up a network of
people whether that be by taking a shots
or looking half-naked on Instagram or
whatever it takes to draw attention to
people or getting attention from people
and then you take that and then you give
a you support with a little bit of
science and information and you try and
peddle some sort of a supplement and
that's been kind of the formula for like
the last 15 20 years or so in our space
and when we all got together we met at
my house and it really was just for us
to get together at that time Justin and
I were working together on a business we
were building an app at that time and
salad Doug dubs our producer they were
working on a online program and we've
been kind of communicating back and
forth with each other because we all
knew love each other but none of us had
actually all got in a room together and
the first time we sat we sat in a living
room just like this at my place and it
was just absolute fire and what it was
was this we felt that somebody needs to
come out and speak the truth and at that
time it wasn't about oh how we're gonna
make money or how we're gonna do this it
really we all had businesses on the side
we already had things that we were
making money so it wasn't like oh let's
find a way to make a ton of money it was
us expressing our feelings about the
space and it was like two hours of just
verbal diarrhea back and forth between
all of us and I didn't know it at the
time but Katrina my girlfriend had was
sitting in the kitchen and she had hit
record on the iPad because she said she
was so enthralled by the conversation
that she thought she had to record it
and we ended up getting it all recorded
she said to me afterwards hey I can't I
caught all that she goes it was so
amazing to hear all that information
going back and forth and the fact that
you guys all don't agree that we sit
there we all came from different
backgrounds which was really interesting
and each one of us had an experience
that was very similar but me being more
from like an athletic perspective
whereas you know like a bodybuilding
perspective where as a wellness
perspective and each one of us
contributing towards that like we're all
trying to seek the same truth and it it
was just interesting because like each
one of those issues are something that
you see it's a common denominator each
one of those different realms and we
talking about you know what we went
through with our clients and what they
came in with you know with their
insecurities and it's just this industry
is so based off of ego and being a
superhero and it's just unrelatable well
that's a good point that you make are
there too is that you know I think we're
one of the first got like buff physique
fitness type guys that came out and were
really vulnerable like we came out and
shared all of our own insecurities and
what drove us to the it drove us to
fitness and it's because we knew at that
time I mean each of us have trained
thousands of clients over our career
where we got 15 to 20 years experience
each of us and something that we I
sorted to put together at least after
years and years of training clients was
almost everybody the it's all rooted in
some sort of an insecurity whether you
felt fat or you were too skinny or you
didn't have muscles or girls didn't like
you whatever is typically what drove you
to the gym and a lot of times those
insecurities drive us down the wrong
paths and I think it drove us down the
wrong path many a time we experienced
that ourselves coming up in this
industry and I'll tell you what you know
the the message tells people or
motivates people through self-hate so
I'm going to the gym because I hate the
way I look I'm eating this particular
way because I hate my body and it can be
quite motivating for a short period of
time but think of the decisions that you
tend to make when you're hating yourself
they tend to be self-destructive over
especially over a long period of time we
all experience that we all did things to
ourselves in eight particular ways that
weren't the best for ourselves because
we didn't like the way we looked we were
insecure about our athletic performance
or whatever and what we're trying to do
is we're trying to flip the message
we're trying to say to people look don't
exercise because you hate yourself and
don't eat because you hate yourself do
those things because you love yourself
and you want to take care of yourself
and you think about that think about
that for a second if if you treated
yourself like somebody who cared about
what kind of decisions would you make
when you went to the gym what kind of
foods would you eat it results in a much
more consistent effective approach but
it's not sexy and it doesn't get you to
buy you know $100 worth of supplements
like I did many times as a teenager
growing up wanting to gain 1015 pounds
of muscle I'd buy all these products
because they promised me so many you
know things
just never came true what was so
different was we you have like the
woowoo
hippie side does all the meditating and
talks like that all time and then you
have like the hardcore bodybuilder side
take whatever it takes to look a certain
way and we're trying to meld the message
because there's something to take from
both camps I think that's so important
and that's another thing that I think is
important in our space is we for
marketing purposes we like to separate
everybody and put them in a box like oh
you're you're the cyclist guy you go
over here oh you're a crossfitter oh you
go over here oh you're a bodybuilder oh
you go over here oh you're power lifter
you go over here and my camp is better
than your camp and we do things better
than you do that and we always separate
all of us and it's like well there's a
lot to learn from everybody right yep so
as an example of the sort of what I
consider the darkness and then the light
side so you know you're talking about
that the when you're in a negative space
when you have that self-hatred actually
can be powerful but only briefly Adam I
wanted to talk about your story one
thing that I find just so interesting
and so revealing is the way that people
talk about themselves and the about us
page and your guys is about us page is
like really raw and I didn't realize
that your father had committed suicide
when you were young and that then your
mom remarried and it was an abusive
relationship how did that play into your
desire to get into fitness and how has
that taken you from sort of being
compelled by a darker side of things and
then to really find something beautiful
in it
well I'm the oldest of five after that
happened instantly I was kind of you
know thrusted into this you know father
role with our parenting type role at a
very young age so I think it matured me
it made me really strong I think at that
age it doesn't get much scarier than
that then with all that responsibility
so the way I look at fear is probably
different than the average person I'm
not afraid of a lot of things at least
I'm not afraid to fail I'm not afraid of
these obstacles that the average person
will sit and ponder for days or get
scared and not move forward in is that
because you had to learn how to cope
with it when you were young yeah I think
so I've got stories that of you know me
acting like a parent at eight nine years
old which I thought was normal I didn't
think it was weird
you know until I got older and I look
back and reflect on wow that was a
little different
to be put in that position but I also am
very grateful for that because it's
definitely turned me into the leader
that I am today so I think that put me
out at a young age I was out by 17 I
moved to the Bay Area to get away from
my hometown where I didn't feel like my
life was moving and then I ended up
going back to school I was going to
school for kinesiology and I kind of
fell into a fitness job I really wasn't
into health and fitness yet at that time
I was just kind of getting into working
out and seeing my body change and so I
was into that piece of it and what I had
found was when I was working at this gym
I really really liked the way it made me
feel and then I had a huge passion for
it because I found that a lot of the
strengths that I got from being a kid
that was kind of parenting at a very
young age was very similar to what I had
the skills that I needed with clients
because many many clients would even
though they're 30 40 50 60 years old and
brilliant lawyers and doctors so a lot
of them are in infancy when it comes to
understanding their their body and
health and taking care of themself and
so I think those skills that I picked up
at a young age ended up carrying over
into me being like a really good trainer
no that's super interesting out of
curiosity what do you want your fan base
to take away from and I'll really give
this to all three of you what do you
want them to take from your
vulnerability and the fact that like
going through your like you know I
divorced and I have two kids and you
guys are just incredibly open with what
you've been through and it I know how it
affects me and I know how it draws me to
you but what what was the reasoning
behind that well I think it feels really
good to be yourself man that's also
third therapeutic it's a stock that way
we wouldn't be able to do this right
here if it wasn't for that I think that
if I had to be putting on a facade or
acting a certain way to get attention
from people or to build a business I
don't know I think I think that's where
people suffer from impostor syndrome
because they and a lot of people do that
especially in this day and age with
social media and the ability to
Photoshop on and edit it up stuff and
make it look so cool so people are
attracted to it I feel like the raw
message that we put and being ourselves
I mean it helps me sleep at night
me feel good about what we're doing
because I get to do a job where I get to
be me you know there's that integrity
behind it that I think we all share we
just we don't want to withhold anything
because I think what we experienced in
this industry
everything is withhold from the consumer
and the wool sort of pulled over a lot
of consumers eyes as far as like
promises of products and quick successes
and you know quick fixes and pills and I
just felt like this is the only way that
we can do it we have to be as honest as
we possibly can and even for me like I'm
super uncomfortable talking in front of
people and like being on a mic and being
on camera but you know that all this is
part of the growth process of being a
human being and trying to improve myself
and I feel like for me to share that
like I've gotten a lot of feedback just
from people that have the same phobias
and for them to kind of come to me and
be like wow you know I love what you're
doing and that you know you're taking
this you know straight on and you might
not be the best of this but every time
we listen you get better and so that
makes me feel good you know that I can
help somebody you know with that you
know I think were part of this comes
from is the fact that we were trainers
for so long and when you're talking
about someone with health and fitness
and you're talking about changing
someone's diet and they're they're
insecure about their body or you know
they got picked on because of it or
maybe they just had a baby or they have
low energy whatever the case may be many
times if I tell you about my issues or
my particular insecurities or my
vulnerabilities it makes it you feel
more comfortable and able to communicate
back to me and then we can start working
together and it's almost like it
happened by accident I remember you know
as a trainer like wow the more
vulnerable I am the more honest I am the
more I let people in the more they let
me in and the more effective I can be as
an instructor I'm able to get that idea
through to someone because I could I
could give you a million different ways
that you know or ideas or pieces of
knowledge that I think are going to
benefit you but if you don't if those
don't resonate with you if they don't
really impact you then it doesn't matter
but if I can give you one just one idea
that truly changes the way you live for
the better then I've been successful
one thing I found super profound in your
story which ties into this notion that
there are the BS myths that happen in
the industry and then there's the real
truth because it gets results in their
last thing is you were at one point just
an amazing shape getting stronger day by
day and then something happened and
suddenly you were still going as hard as
you were but you were losing mass you
were losing strength what what was that
and and what did that teach you about
sort of the cultism that it happens
industry in hindsight it was the the
greatest growth lesson I could ever have
hoped for at the time it was torture it
was absolute torture was terrible I you
know coming up in in Fitness also being
very insecure about my body wanting to
build muscles a skinny kid growing up I
did lots of things to my body that
weren't the best for I force-fed myself
a eight to ten times a day sometimes it
set my alarm in the middle of night so I
could wake up and take AB weight gain or
shake I take all kinds of supplements
you know everything over-the-counter
that I thought would work and even
things in the gray market that you know
maybe ten years ago you could buy
designer steroids over-the-counter so
I'd take those and at the age of I want
to say 29 or 30 my body rebelled I had
severe gastro is I couldn't keep weight
on my body I felt weak I felt tired and
for somebody who had built this shell of
a body around you know like I did I
built this show I'm the buff strong guy
I'm the confident you know energetic guy
and now I'm weak losing muscle I have no
energy like Who am I and I had to really
self examine I had to look and see what
was going on now at the time I owned a
personal training studio and in my
studio I had you know personal trainers
like myself I had massage therapists I
had a gut health specialist and the in a
hormone specialist and the gut health
specialist and the hormone specialists
were both on that wellness side but at
the time I would have considered woowoo
right like I'm the fitness guy like lift
weights macros proteins fats carbs
calories that's it they were much more
into the other stuff food intolerances
you know sleep
how hormones you know you know how to
balance out your hormones meditation
that kind of stuff and so finally I
broke down and I sat down with them I
said okay what's going on like I think
I'm eating healthy I think I'm doing
everything right I'm a fitness
professional what's going on the doctor
has no idea what's going on they want to
put me on all these medications like
what do I do
and so they sat me down and we talked
about food intolerances we talked about
fasting we talked about getting better
sleep and my entire approach to
nutrition and training was flipped on
its head now here's the irony the irony
of all of this is I changed my approach
because at the time I like to focus on
was my health like I just need to be
healthy I don't care about building
muscle I don't care about being lean
like I need to be healthy because this
is this isn't good and so that's what I
did I focused on my health 100% and the
irony was I looked better than I had
ever looked before I walked around
leaner then I'd ever looked before I was
strong I was fit and that was a paradigm
shattering moment I think the the the
the best learning lessons that we get in
life are the ones that are the hardest
because they forced you to really look
at things in like I don't think I don't
think anything else would have forced me
to do that then then that what happened
to me now if you guys had somebody come
to you and you couldn't see them they
could only type you questions you had no
idea who they were what their background
was anything like that and they just
said they're profoundly unhappy with
where they're at from a physical
standpoint what are some universal
principles that you can dictate to
somebody that while there's no universal
diet that would help the greatest number
I have some things that I started to do
over years and years of training people
and the very first thing that I do with
anybody's actually asked them not to
change anything I think one of the
biggest mistakes that people make is
they try out what their girlfriends do
one or they're trying out what they but
their buddy does and they have no idea
where their baseline is I highly
recommend tools I love like you know the
fat secrets or the you know
My Fitness Pal type of track food
trackers and I have them track just for
like a week or two of consistency and
like eat how you would normally eat
don't try and impress your trainer and
then I haven't tracked like their
movement steps because I think today
this is way more problem today than it
was 15 years ago when I first started
it's it blows my mind when we look at
what the average American moves like
we're somewhere between 3,000 and 4,000
steps a day is with the average american
steps right now but if you had a tracker
on and you were to go for a walk for an
hour you would surpass that so that
means in a 24 hour day most people don't
even [__] move in an hour that's
crazy so tracking your movement and
tracking what you're consuming I think
is huge and then instead of taking
things out of the diet or adding all
kinds of crazy exercise I actually like
to add food nutrition nutritious food
that they're probably not getting almost
every single time they're over consuming
on sugar and too much processed foods a
lot of my ladies won't be getting enough
protein and not enough healthy fats so I
tend to look at somebody's food for a
week and find an area where I think
they're not getting enough nutrients and
I first show them ok let's start to
implement that put that into the diet
and more often than not when you start
to put good healthy foods in there it
starts to limit some of the bad foods
and that's without me saying take this
away if you restrict people or say you
can't have this from them it turns into
this demonizing thing and this I can or
I can't and I'm bad I'm good which I'm
trying to get rid of that it's more
about like let's talk about what your
body needs to run optimally so you kick
ass at work you kick ass in your
relationship you kick ass in the gym
we're evolved to made the mistake in the
beginning of overwhelming our clients
with too much of our knowledge and
information and we want to set them on
this path and get them to success fairly
quickly but what we found in our careers
is we have to really simplify the
process and just present it in a way
where they can focus on one to two
things at a time and what are those big
things and it's it's like the most
simple things you could possibly think
of sleep better nutrition choices and
habits you know move
and then stress management you know
those types of things where it's so
overlooked these days like sleep is such
one of those things that we all kind of
had this sort of Epiphany like of the
impact that sleep really has well it
sucks as an answer everybody wants to
hear what I want to hear the pill tell
me this we know what can I take but the
truth is those are the big rocks yeah
I'll tell you what you know there's
there's a there's a massive lack of
awareness surrounding nutrition and it's
it's for a few different reasons one is
it's we can't trust our body's natural
systems of of signaling anymore so for
example the signal of satiety like when
I feel like I'm adding enough food now
why can't you trust that nowadays well
most diets are comprised of a majority
of processed foods and processed foods
are highly engineered they're engineered
to override your systems of satiety I'll
give you an example if I were to take
you know 2,000 calories worth of plain
you know white baked potato no salt no
butter and I put that in front here and
I said eat this in 15 minutes you
wouldn't be able to do it but if I put
potato chips in front of you that
wouldn't be a problem most of the money
that goes into designing foods doesn't
go into the nutrition doesn't go into
any of that stuff goes into you making
them as highly palatable as possible
everything from the taste to the crunch
to the mouthfeel to all these different
things and so it's hard to trust our
systems of satiety when we're overriding
them with foods that for most of human
evolution simply didn't exist then you
have our hunger we can't we most people
don't know what it feels like to be
hunger hungry and I know that sounds
shocking but think about it we know that
fasting is got tremendous health
benefits most people have never gone
longer than 15 16 hours without food
their entire lives maybe 24 hours one
time when they had a medical procedure
or something like that right
none of us that ever felt hunger so what
we what we think hunger is is cravings
so when someone says oh I'm starving
they have no idea what that feels like
what they what they're having is a
craving and what does cravings come from
emotion context
people around you when you say the
context what do you mean I think this
messes up a lot of your movie popcorn
go to the movies you know you create
popcorn at a movie you didn't want
popcorn until you walked in on that door
right yeah advertisers know this and
they create these associations and so
then we start to crave foods based on
context become aware of that you can
actually change that so I'll give you an
example because you can actually take
this and work it to your advantage
so there's a lot of things that we get
from food aside from just the taste
unfortunately most of us just no taste
that's the one we really pay attention
to but there's a lot of things we get
from food how we feel our energy there's
emotions attached to food and I'll give
you an example I had a client a what a
long time ago who was probably the most
unhealthy person I've ever met my life
in terms of nutrition it was terrible
she didn't drink water literally like
all she would wake up in the morning
diet coke and then that's all she would
have all day long and so we started out
with changing making very basic changes
to nutrition and one of them was to get
her to start eating vegetables now she
hated vegetables she said she gagged
when she ate vegetables so over the
course of the months that I trained her
I taught her to pay attention to other
things other signals in her body that
were associated with the foods that she
ate so she started figuring out that the
bagel that she ate in the morning with
all the cream cheese caused a little bit
of bloating she started to realize that
when she did have some broccoli
digestion was better skin was better
energy was better she just felt better
overall over time that association with
the broccoli actually got her to eat
more broccoli she started finding that
she wanted to eat more broccoli because
of those positive associations so you
can actually change how you perceive
foods based on some of these positive
signals that we get from a lot of
healthy foods and look when you're
eating processed foods all the time we
know that the way your body your brain
perceives the taste of things will
change based on what you eat all the
time so if you eat a lot of sugar a lot
of processed sugar fruit isn't gonna
taste that sweet because the processed
sugar is just overriding all those you
know receptors in the brain whatever
things get down regulated you start to
perceive things differently I tell you
what you go on a 24 or
forty-eight hour fast go grab a fruit
grab a strawberry and see how it tastes
all of a sudden it's like biting into a
skittle you know it's incredible how
often do you guys fast
Sal's every month three first 72 hours I
noticed a lot of health benefits from it
initially anti inflammatory gut health
you know just felt better but now the
reason why fast isn't for the physical
health benefits now it's the I don't
know what you want to call it spiritual
effects or whatever it's the breaking
the chain from food because I started to
realize how often I ate because I was
bored or because I was supposed to eat
like oh it's noon I'm supposed to grab
some food and then Ellefson had all this
time on my hands and like what do I do
now and when I'm stressed out I feel
like I want to grab something to eat but
I'm supposed to be fasting today and so
it really changed my relationship with
food
now of course fasting could also create
a negative association with food so it's
not like a cure-all but for somebody who
came from the side of fitness where I
was forced feeding myself every two or
three hours which by the way is a myth
that doesn't build more muscle fasting
was like I mean it was it was a game
changer game changer for all muscle
didn't fall off my body you know I'm
feeling better and then when I read I
actually get stronger and feel better
and I'm assimilating food better well
this is fantastic so I do it now more
for those effects than anything else
talk to me it's so interesting that you
use the word spiritual how do you have
to do something to frame it as a
spiritual act or how does that tie in
food is a massive distraction for most
people stop eating for two days and
realize and then you'll realize just how
much you've cope with your day-to-day
stresses anxieties or issues with food
take that away and you're left with your
solution I have services you to be more
hyper aware of everything that you're
going through your body literally talks
to you the way we talked about fasting I
think is different than people in our
own space
it's and we call that when we first
started talking about fasting it's like
we talked all about all the benefits of
it but watch how our space will market
it and now it's being marketed as a fat
burns solution as yeah as a fat loss
frustratingly
yeah it's it's it's just
it's the most abused drug in Western
societies 100% 100% what do most people
die of you know in America it's the
abuse of food it's the overeating of
food it's the eating the wrong types of
food think about what you do when you're
born you know I mean you ever hear
people tell you how much easier it is to
not overeat when they're busy yeah
versus when they have nothing to do dude
fasting was a game-changer for me from a
biological perspective it is utterly
fascinating at otha G and all the other
things that are happening in the body
where you're breaking down the sick and
malformed cells and proteins and all
that which that's already amazing but
then I've literally never heard somebody
talk about the spiritual side before
which is exactly why I do it now I'll
sum it up a little bit differently and
say for me it's doing the hard thing
it's constantly having your mind drip on
you like oh you could have that you can
have it and I remember the very first
time I fasted I woke up in the middle of
night 2 with the worst headache ever now
because it's a spiritual experience for
me I wake up and I'm like it hurts to
even lay my head on a pillow and so I'm
like oh my god total misery like I can't
think straight like I should just go
have some Advil then I was like wait a
second does it add Valve calories I
didn't know if it had calories I
wouldn't let myself do it and so I had
to like muscle through because I was
like at the end of this three day fast I
am going to be able to say I had nothing
but water for three days and that's it
like that meant something to me and so
not taking the advil and pushing through
it became like I have now done a hard
thing it's present in every major
religion in the world as a practice for
a reason for thousands of years and it's
because of the profound benefits that
has on you not just physically but
mentally and spiritually it is something
that is it is an absolute game changer
and when you look at some of the
advancements that we've made in Western
societies I mean people far more people
now die of too much food than too little
food we we've moved away from the the
benefits of being without we're never
with a think about that like how many
people do you know that have never gone
a day
without eating most people from the day
that they're born has there been
anything else that's counterintuitive
like that that you guys have come across
at almost gets a religious reaction from
people when you cause like even bringing
up fasting can wine some people up I got
a good one for you
cardio is one of the worst ways to get
lean and I know I'm gonna blow
everyone's mind by 9:00 right now
absolutely
so let me explain you know what I'm
talking about so oh now you can't get
around the fact that you need that
there's a calorie balance or the the was
it the second law of thermodynamics
right calories in versus calories out so
you need to be able to burn more
calories than you take in in order to
tap into your fat stores and become
leaner and there's two ways we can look
at it we can look at it either I'm
burning a lot of calories manually or
I'm getting to burn more calories
getting my body burn more calories
automatically now on a time versus time
basis if we were to compare an hour of
cardio versus an hour of let's say
weight training cardio definitely burns
more calories much more calories it's
it's a manual way of doing it but
resistance training does something far
different resistance training tells your
body to burn more calories on its own
automatically now in the context of
modern life where food is easily
accessible it's everywhere where most of
us are sedentary throughout the day you
want a faster metabolism you want your
body to want to burn more calories
cardial also and all activity does this
by the way all activity sends a signal
to your body to become more efficient at
that particular activity this is this is
called this is adaptation so if I do
lots of cardio if I get an elliptical
and I go for 45 minutes or I get on the
treadmill I go on there for an hour the
signal I'm sending to my body is I'm
telling my body to become more efficient
at that type of activity which requires
more endurance and it won't smear
ficient with my calories because
remember I'm burning lots of calories
while I'm doing it now how does it
become more efficient well do I need a
lot of muscle to do endurance type
activity no you don't need much muscle
at all you just need enough muscle to
keep you moving and you need a lot of
endure
in order to continue doing it so what
you find when you do that is a metabolic
adaptation where your metabolism starts
to slow down now they've done Studies on
this and they'll find that this is
absolutely true you take somebody who's
you know really really good at running
and they'll burn less calories per hour
than somebody who hasn't run very often
they've studied modern hunter-gatherers
where they find you know scientists
actually win and I think was a hodza
tribe if I'm not mistaken a jadi zhey a
if I'm not mistaken they went in and
they did some pretty sophisticated
testing to test out their metabolic
rates now they're very active compared
to the average person or they the
average Westerner and they predicted
that they would be burning something
like two or three thousand times the
calories of the typical you know
Westerner and what they found was that
that wasn't true at all but you actually
burned a little bit more calories a good
body adapt and because their body that
no no why is that why would that make
sense well if you're a hunter-gatherer
does it make sense that your body's
gonna have you burn a [__] ton of
calories when food is relatively scarce
and hard to come by of course not it's
going to adapt
now resistance training to something
different because resistance training is
sending a signal to the body that says
we need more strength to prevent this
damage that we're creating with this
exercise or this stress more strength
requires bigger muscle fibers bigger
muscle fibers contract harder more
muscle more muscle also burns more
calories and so the primary signal or
the primary adaptation that comes from
resistance training is stronger faster
metabolism the primary signal that we're
sending with cardio is become more
efficient with calories and increase
endurance and so over time resistance
training is far superior look I've I'll
give an example I had a client years ago
young lady who was absolutely obsessed
with remaining lean and she ran about 20
miles a week so she ran you know
marathons and half marathons
she was active every single day and she
would come in and lift weights with me
about once a week but the majority of
her training was this lots of endurance
training now if she ate anything over
1,700 calories and she weighed about 125
pounds so she wasn't a massive person
but anything over 1,700 calories she'd
gain body fat
now when you looked at Oliver
tivity 17 and her calories wasn't that
much at all but her body had adapted and
I would tell her if we slowly decrease
your cardio and increase the amount of
resistance trend you do and try to get
your body stronger you'll find that
you'll be able to eat more and maintain
the same body weight the same body fat
percentage and over time we made that
switch and we got to the point where she
was able to consume over 2,400 calories
a day oh and she started as she was only
running 5 miles a week that's a massive
difference from 20 miles a week down to
5 miles a week focused on strength Frank
so she built a little bit of muscle and
she was able to consume an additional
700 calories a day with far less
activity now think about the average
person living the average life that's
learn extreme analogy for somebody Majan
this young lady comes in and she's 50 or
100 pounds overweight I actually don't
want her weight to drop it all in fact
if a month goes by and she's been weight
training and training with me
consistently 3 4 times a week and she
lost 10 or 15 pounds
I failed that's how I look at it and
that's hard to tell somebody who's
trying to sign up with you and say hey I
need you to lose me fifty or hundred
pounds but I know if I were to lose her
10 pounds I'd say in the first week
which a lot of people think would be a
great thing
it wouldn't be whatsoever because I'm
already heading that direction I'm
already starting to adapt her body to
lower amount of calories and moving a
ton I don't want that in fact I would
like to keep her weight right about
where it's at and if I and I know if I
hit the sweet spot because if I've
introduced weight training and I've
introduced more nutrient nutrient-dense
foods into her diet then she's
definitely building some muscle and if
she's not seeing a huge spike on the
scale we're probably burning a little
bit of body fat so it's probably a nice
little even exchange of at the end of
the month we didn't lose anyway you
stayed at a net zero but we probably
added five pounds of muscle and and lost
five pounds of fat you're in a way
better place right there than the girl
who came in and did it like Biggest
Loser style and I lost her thirty pounds
in a month time I mean that's a great
example 85% of those contestants put all
the weight and some back for that exact
reason yeah they actually I forgot which
contestant it was but they their bait
their metabolic rate had got so slow
they lost a lot of weight but they were
at the point where they had to consume
1200 ad a and worked out for an hour a
day just to maintain their body weight
which is a kind of a crappy position to
be in if you're trying to you know
maintain your health I mean you lose
imagine losing 50 pounds and now all you
can ever eat is 1200 or 1500 calories a
day yeah no question I was talking to
some of the contestants on The Biggest
Loser like behind the scenes and they
said the producers literally asked you
on day one do you want to get healthier
do you want to win oh no because they're
two different tracks first it's like if
you want to go on the healthy track
you're probably gonna get bumped in the
first couple vote outs but you're gonna
be on a lifelong path of actually
knowing what to do and how to lose
weight you're just not gonna lose a
crazy fast and I thought I actually
respected that they were that honest
that it's like this is a game show yeah
so which do you want and if you want to
win then we're gonna tell you how to do
it right and I thought okay but that's
also a little dicey in terms of all the
people watching the show that think oh
just go and slave myself to a
Stairmaster and you know I mean I've
never been a traitor when that I was a
trainer when that the first season came
out and men the gyms were flooded right
after that this wave of people that were
motivated from this new show that came
out and that was a major hurdle that I
had to get over because I had already
known at that point that's not the
healthy way like getting you to lose 100
pounds in three months is not ideal and
for sure not for sure 85% chance you're
gonna put it all back on and some and
even the small percentage the 15 percent
actually keep it off you should see the
lifestyle they have to keep up they're
the ones they're just they're a little
more determined to keep running their
body into the ground and that's the only
reason why they haven't cause it's just
it's inevitable that it's gonna rebound
it's gonna rebel you cannot get in a
fight with your body it's kind of wooden
you will lose that's actually a really
interesting statement that you can't get
in a fight with your body you're gonna
lose to that point I want to talk about
like what happens at a gut level I heard
you talk about you know in so many
cultures you'll see like they'll do some
sort of Prayer it doesn't have to be
religious why do they do that
so we had a who we consider the
Godfather of wellness Paul check and
he's been never heard that name so
that's already interesting okay so yeah
you've got to meet him great incredible
individual extremely intelligent I'm
always asking like what are you doing
when he does certain things so we all
had dinner and serve him his plate and
he does this thing over his food for
about you know 15 seconds or so you know
he's not religious yeah that's why it
was weird anyone who starts eating so
after after we were all done we get on
the podcast and I asked and I said Paul
what I didn't know you were religious we
were you praying before you and he goes
no no because I'm not praying goes I'm
asking my body if it wants this food and
I'm asking the food if it wants to be
eating and it goes through this whole
thing and I thought to myself like well
that's silly like like why would you and
then I thought to myself for a second
and there's a lot of wisdom in ancient
traditions or cultures that have lasted
for thousands of years and if you look
at every single major religion they all
have some kind of a practice before
eating some kind of an awareness
practice if you're in a highly stressed
sympathetic state you're probably not
going to be conducive to digesting food
properly - you're gonna be in a
pro-inflammatory state this is one of
the reasons why I recommend people with
gut issues don't eat post-workout you
know we're always told that you should
have food right after your workout you
know it builds muscle replenishes
glycogen but in in a post-workout state
you know inflammation is up supposed to
be it's one of the signals that tells
your body to build muscle or not stuff
but in that higher elevation of
inflammatory markers or signals in your
body probably not the best time to
introduce food especially if you have
good issues because when the gut is
inflamed putting food in there increases
your risk of things like leaky gut
syndrome or developing auto immunities
to particular types of foods like you
know food intolerances or whatever and
so it makes sense to slow down relax for
a second let everything calm down and
then eat the food versus what we tend to
do when we eat which is I'm in a hurry I
got 10 minutes shovel this down my face
and go the other thing I learned from
him was to not drink water with my meal
which I thought was kind of strange but
it immediately slows you down and it
makes you chew the heck out of your food
and I know you realize how often you
take it like pills
yeah just took you to swallow chips you
chew swallow that was like one
game-changers when we talk about fasting
being a game-changer try eating without
one time she's never digested a he's
never ate a meal without fluid try it
one time and just pay attention to like
how much you have to actually chew your
food
you'd have to chew it like 30 times they
actually get it all the way down that's
right
so so it's really that you know your
state of mind impacts how you digest
things you can increase your your
inflammatory markers by a thought you
can change how your cert your central
nervous system is reacting you can
change your hormone levels you so and
this is all verified right I mean this
is not even controversial to say anymore
so it only makes sense that if you want
to be able to utilize that your the food
that you're eating create a good but it
also created a better relationship with
your food I mean if I'm constantly
eating in a stress State I am creating
an association or a connection to that
food that may not may not be serving me
so stop slow down if you're religious
pray if you're not take a breath you
know ask yourself or just become aware
of what you're about to do and what
you're about to eat and then you'll
notice that your food choices will start
to change and you start to feel better
as you're eating yeah I never would have
believed this in fact the first time I
heard it I thought it was stupid I was
like yeah and then Lisa was going
through what she was going through and
we had just talked to every doctor you
can imagine heard every terrible
ridiculous answer including
immunoglobulin transfusions and she was
gonna be doing that for six months it
was just crazy town and then we finally
started doing sampling of the microbiome
to see like what did she actually have
and how is it active and getting down to
like the RNA level of what metabolites
are being produced by the actual
bacteria that you have and all that so
getting really specific and the woman
that was walking us through it a woman
named dr. Helen Massey aged and she said
oh Lisa do you meditate before you eat
and wash it and I was like literally
everything you just said like you can
[__] up
you're like inflammatory State right
with the thought you can shift out of
the parasympathetic into the sympathetic
and like that it actually impacts the
state of your microbiome and thusly what
they're producing
from the food which is why the same meal
one day can sit fine and then the next
day caused an upset stomach oh look the
one of the highest concentrations of
serotonin receptors in the body is in
your gut
they call it the second brain the third
is the heart by the way and it's funny
how we always say think you know feel
with your gun think with your heart or
you know with your head for anybody
right now who's watching this and
thinking oh you guys are crazy for sure
you felt butterflies when you fall in
love for sure you've felt your bubble
guts if you get real nervous
the term [__] your pants comes from
something that actually happens when you
get super super frightened so definitely
changing your state of mind definitely
will affect your gut and we know that
the gut affects your entire the entire
body in terms of health so how you go
into how you eat and how your energy is
around your meal that makes a tremendous
impact
no that's super crazy like all of that
stuff realizing how interconnected it is
realizing how important that stuff like
meditation was something that I put off
for a long time I just had no it felt
really feminine like that's just no
[__] answer and because by nature I
find that I'm way in touch with my
feminine side like that was not the
thing I struggled with right you
struggled being too skinny I struggled
being too weak like I had to learn to
toughen up and so anything that made me
feel like I was retrograding I just
didn't want to do and then mark Devine
the Navy SEAL it was like basically Tom
stop being a jackass like hey and
because of who he was and everything I
just thought you know what like if this
guy is telling me to pull my head out of
my ass basically and give it a shot I
should really give it a shot and that
that has changed my life and I'll even
say that it's made my business better
it's for me it's the ability to get into
the parasympathetic nervous system where
you're calm and creative right so that
alpha wave state that I get into when
I'm taking a shower which is insane and
my business my biggest business
breakthroughs are always in the shower
because I'm so relaxed and to think that
I can get there you know on dry land as
it were at any time simply by breathing
from my diaphragm of like you know
literally getting into a space for me
it's when I can get into a dark space
and I play the sounds of like rain or
the ocean or something and I just lose
myself and that is so so funny you bring
that up because I had the same
experience at being kind of feminine I'm
coming from football and you know we
kind of we just go operate off of like
muscling through everything and over
intensifying everything and I had a
moment like that too going through wim
HOF and his techniques were I mean you
have to immerse yourself in an ice bath
and I was trying to apply the same sort
of operating system I was going off on
forever where I would tense my whole
body up and try it over my over power of
my way through this environment and it
just humbled the hell out of me I
couldn't I could not breathe it felt
like panic until it forced me to release
relax breathe calm the system become
aware of how to access that
parasympathetic state and since that I
figured out now how to pull those
breathing practices into my life and
then to business and into at home now
actually have a practice in place where
I can find that state and how to get
there navigating it but I feel like a
lot of males you know with with yoga
practices and meditation it's just not
very appealing and I think that's why
another reason why we trying to bring it
up so often on the show being you know
weight lifters and but we just don't we
don't address all the systems it's so
funny to me like if you were to if
you're a drag racer for a car and you're
trying to get the most horsepower most
performance out of it but then one of
your systems like say your tires are
completely off or not balanced or you
don't have any oil in the engine but
then you're talking about putting a
spoiler on the car putting a turbo and
I'd be like well why wouldn't you fix
one of the basic systems if you really
want to get this extra edge I feel
fitness in your body is the same way -
it's like we're always looking for the
competitive edge with the latest
nootropic or the latest fat burner or
the pre-workout to get this edge but
it's like you're not sleeping at night
you're stuffing your face like crazy
you're not feeding your body right you
have all these other systems that are
not running properly in your body it's
like men you would get so much more out
of your body if you actually just kind
of focused and there's most of those
these things are free and it's easy it's
like okay I just got to go to bed or I
got to meditate okay that doesn't cost
me anything it just means I gotta be
aware stop and do it and
people if they would just learn to
practice some of these things they would
see the performance benefits and they'd
see that most of these things would
actually supersede you know whatever
latest greatest pill is out that's being
pushed there's that you know there's
there's getting your body to adapt and
then there's optimizing right and
getting your body adapt requires a
little bit of stress so it's okay to
stress your body too you got to push
your body sometimes push your mind
sometimes push your spiritual practice
sometimes to get yourself to grow and
change
but then there's optimizing when you
balance everything out so that you can
perform at your app is an absolute best
and that happens by looking at the
entire person as an organism a whole
organism it's not one piece it's not
just muscle endurance it's not just
nutrition it's all those things
it's including your state of mind
including your sense of fulfillment your
sense of meaning all those things when
you look at all those and you optimize
those and balance those you are capable
of some incredible things if you just
try to force everything all the time and
you always are pushing adaptation by
lots of stress lots of stress lots of
stress well you overcome your body's
ability to adapt and now you're in a
state of you know trying to survive and
that's not a good state to be in if you
want to perform at the top so going back
to those basic building blocks you guys
are talking about you brought up sleep
twice so how can people optimize their
sleep well I think right now I think
something that I had since the show had
to start doing I realized that I have
the lights on in my house till 10 11
o'clock at night I'm watching TV or have
a computer screen in my bed and I didn't
realize how much that was affecting my
sleep and the ability just to fall
asleep so I actually have to I put my
phone away at 7:00 p.m. it gets put away
by the nightstand I turn all the lights
off go by candle or red light I've got
red light at my house I can feel the
difference there and there's night so be
honest that I can't do that I'm in the
middle of something I'm working I do
work till midnight on some nights but
I'm aware of it so for me like to
optimize sleep those practices have to
be in place and I you know I recommend
either like an audiobook or reading
right before bed
I think that really helps calm the mind
and I think that will help get you
better sleep I have I have two kids one
of my favorite things about having
children is you can do these things with
them and the results are very clear
because kids have way less filters than
adults do way less right so so I started
doing this at home so I when the Sun
Goes Down the lights go off and I'll put
candle light on or I'll go real real dim
light so I'm kind of mimicking you know
natural sunlight and when I started
doing that my kids went to bed on time
no problem
slept great woke up in the morning
refreshed feeling good not acting up
when I don't do that trouble sleeping my
daughter will wake me up because she
can't sleep they'll wake up a little bit
more irritable or in a bad mood they're
just not getting as good of sleepers
good quality sleep so so yeah if you
have kids run that experiment on them
yourself and you'll see it's pretty it's
pretty intense that I tried it out with
my kids and we started dimming the
lights down and using candle light and
it just really it sets the tone so this
has been one of those hacks that
actually stole from salad we've applied
it's been it's been doing good things
for how long before bedtime so probably
about an hour actually I always
recommend clients an hour before bed but
ideally you want to match the Sun so
when the Sun Goes Down that's when
everything else goes down as well and if
you have to work on electronics if you
have to do work on a computer wear
something that at least partially blocks
some of the blue light that comes from
those electronics as that can tell the
brain that the Sun is still out and
you'll find that you know studies will
show that you know changes melatonin
production and sleep quality so lights
go down when the Sun Goes Down put on
blue blockers and then you'll find that
your sleep quality should improve as a
result mmm no make sense all right guys
before I asked my last question tell
these guys where they can find mine pump
so we have a YouTube channel line pump
TV and we post fitness tips on there we
do interviews on there we post some
funny stuff and then of course our
podcast that's where we reach the most
people and that's mine pump and you can
find it on almost any platform and then
on Instagram is mine pumps out mine pump
atom mine pump Justin we also have a
free
but you can download mine pump and on
there we the whole reason why we created
s because we have almost 800 episodes
and it allows you to search so you can
search we've when it's really related to
health and fitness we've probably talked
about it at least once or five or ten
times thoroughly yeah so if you actually
put a topic in there you can see all the
episodes where we've discussed that
topic that's wicked
I don't normally lie and ask an
additional question but I'm gonna slide
one in why mind pump and not like body
pump it's a really good question and we
went back and forth on it for a really
long time because we knew when we first
started this that we didn't want to
pigeonhole ourselves into just fitness
and so we didn't want to be barbell
something or you know just body workout
pump or something yeah which is funny
because when you when you when you work
in new media you know creating a niche
will get you more viewers or whatever
like if we called our podcast like the
Kido podcast with a paleo podcast we
probably would have got more downloads
initially but then you're stuck right
and well we all have lots of interests
outside of fitness and most of them are
related to health but health is such a
broad you know spectrum so we wanted to
come up with a name that allowed us to
talk about fitness but also allowed us
to have guests on and talk about
politics economics is you know business
religion spirituality whatever we found
interesting so we had you know open that
door I love that all right now my real
last question for each of you what is
the one thing that people could change
right now today to have the biggest
impact on their health but one thing
okay
if you can do this and this is a tough
thing but if you can do this
dramatically reduce or eliminate if you
can your consumption of highly processed
foods and that these are foods that have
a long shelf life come in a box that you
can you know you can keep stored for a
long time simply doing that your body
will start to regulate its weight more
accurately in terms of health so if you
just eliminate processed foods you'll
find typically that you'll eat less make
better food choices and you'll find
healthy foods or natural food
more palatable more appealing takes
about a week or two of withdrawal but if
you just do that alone most people will
see some some pretty significant chains
I think that that I speak to the step
one all the time because I think that's
getting worse it's becoming easier to
not leave your home and have everything
brought right to you so you know I know
I rattled off the stat of how many steps
the average person takes a day I think
we're gonna see that get worse and I've
I've changed somebody's body composition
without ever touching cardio by just
teaching them how to move more
throughout their day and create more
habits like around that and I don't
think you should go after a generic goal
like just ten thousand steps I think you
should find your baseline because
everyone's gonna be different and and
try to increase that by ten percent a
month you know ten percent a month try
and step a little bit more before you
knew it know it you'll be stepping three
four times what you were doing before
and it won't seem like it you'll see
energy go up weight loss come down you
won't be sitting down sedentary eating
all the time this is a something that's
changed my life personally and it's so
little and simple is every time we if we
eat out we didn't make the food we eat
out we walk for 45 minutes hour right
afterwards on it helps with the
digestive process plus you're gonna step
and move you're gonna burn calories I
think it helps mitigate a lot of the
damage from the food that you would
consume yeah I think I mean I could go
the angle of sleep again but I think
just apply us a breathing practice would
be immensely effective and what that
does is it it really forces you to
become present and it forces you to calm
down and find that parasympathetic state
and what that even feels like and
experience that so you can you can
basically give your body a chance to
recover I just don't feel like people
give their bodies a chance these days
and we're so overwhelmed and
overstimulated with everything that I
think that message today probably has
one of the more impactful things behind
it that all right guys you're going to
want to dive into the world of mind pump
these guys are amazing having met them
up at their own place for the first time
clicking with them immediately and
getting a chance to dive deeper into the
world and see
how real they are I cannot stress that
enough these guys are no [__] they
give you the raw honest truth no matter
what it is they're completely vulnerable
they're completely themselves they
debunk things in the standard way of
thinking in a way that I find incredible
and one thing that we didn't get to in
this episode which I'm very sad about
but is maybe the thing that makes me
love them the most and it is that they
actively seek out disconfirming evidence
anybody that actively seeks out to
figure out how they're wrong how they
could evolve their thinking that are
actually open to hearing ideas that do
not match their current way of thinking
and they say look either I'm gonna learn
something new and that's empowering or
I'm going to realize now I was right in
the first place but at least they put
themselves in that position to really
open themselves up to the possibility of
a new idea a new answer in order to
evolve their own thinking so they can
get better results so they can help
other people get better results and by
the way they give away so much content
it's crazy
so no matter what you want to do if you
want to change your own physique you
want to learn how to eat whatever the
case may be they've got all of that
stuff for free so check them out at mine
pump media at mine pump Adam at mine
pump Justin at mine pumps I'll get it
it's absolutely incredible these guys
are truly unparalleled in the industry
and the thing you're gonna see when you
watch them in their normal habitat the
first half of their episode is just
absolutely [__] hilarious and then
the second half is super deep they go
way into the science and really bringing
the two together and knowing that you
have to entertain before you have the
right to educate it's super super
powerful all right guys if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary
gentlemen thank you thank you guys so
much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe you're gonna get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential